In 1968, they were starting to use more of shots that were made in Germany.
And as you can imagine, the Germans were a little more precise.
They were steel and they were turned and were much rounder and smoother.
And generally, I never did like those as well.
They just felt slippery to me or something.
I liked the ones that had a little bit of imperfection in it.
But I did throw one from time to time because when you go to the games, they make you throw those kinds.
Now, the weight I know is measured.
What about the dimensions?
The size, there's a minimum and maximum, and there's a little leeway in there, and it doesn't look like much difference, but it feels a lot different.
And let's see, you never, did you ever get to a meet and the shot that you had planned to use at that meet was not there?
Not that I remember because I carried it with me.
Okay.
Now at the Olympics, did you use your shot?
No, they didn't allow us to.
They furnished the shots.
They did get us, the U.S.
team, all of the sizes and brands that they would be using to train with a couple months before.
And sizes, meaning there were some variations?
Yes, and diameter, a little bit different diameters on them.
Did you like the smaller or the larger?
I usually went with the larger.
And then the outside was polished or did it have kind of ridges in it?
The German tool ones had little fine ridges in it.
The cast ones would have obvious where the seam was and it's built up and welded a little bit and smoothed down.
Had a little different feel to it.
Generally by the 68 they started using the ones that had been turned and were perfectly round.
A little different feel.
You had to get used to it.
I had a little trouble getting used to them.
And after you do, it's all right.
In all of your shot putting, did you ever drop a shot on yourself and bruise or mash anything or on anybody else?
No, I hit a guy with a shot put one time.
that was a football player at A&M that was cutting through the area.
And he didn't do it anymore.
Didn't do any permanent damage to him, a guy named Doug McLean.
He became a lawyer, which I'm not sure there's any connection there.
As you look back over the whole, all of your shot putting, what were the important victory steps that you remember most?
The first time I threw 60 feet with a 16-pound shot.
Go back to high school.
That was in high school.
Oh, okay.
And I was out practicing by myself.
That was before, that was just after I graduated from high school.
Going back to high school, the 64, first state record in the shot put, 64 feet was the memorable one.
Do you remember when you first won a shot put?
Yes, I was in the 8th grade and I beat the 9th graders.
And that would have been with the 12 pound or was there a lighter one?
It was a 12 pound.
Okay.
And then the first year you won at the state was your...
No, I'll take that back.
That would have been an eight-pound shot.
Oh, okay.
Eight-pound junior high.
And when I was in eighth, ninth, then tenth grade I started throwing the 12-pound.
And I was throwing an Amarillo, a meet in Amarillo, and the best shot putter was a ninth grader from the other junior high in Pampa, which is the first year we had two.
And I won that meet over there, and I was only an eighth grader throwing.
We didn't have enough to have an eighth and ninth grade team, so I threw with the ninth graders.
And then in high school, when did you first win?
Well, my first year I was throwing 53 feet, which was about the third best in the district.
And then I re-injured a broken foot that I had from football.
I broke it in basketball, re-injured it, and had to drop out of track.
At that point, when I threw 53 feet, I had beat the two guys that were leading the district.
So I had hopes of getting to go to regional that year.
They had thrown 55 feet, but every time I'd compete against them, I'd beat them.
So I had hopes in that foot injury.
kept me out of the rest of that season and kept me out of football the next fall.
It affected basketball some but it also gave me some time though to decide that I really want to be a shot putter I think.
All right, this determination that you developed, this self-determination, did anybody in high school and family or coach or anything help to?
create that?
Not really.
The main motivation that I got was with my high school coach, Dwayne Lyons, that I mentioned earlier.
But that was after I'd already really developed an interest in doing this thing.
And I liked working out by myself.
I liked throwing against a tape measure instead of some judges trying to decide whether it was a good throw or not.
And by then, I liked doing it.
And I liked trying to throw it a little farther.
And so it was never.
I've always felt guilty because talking about determination and drive, it's something I enjoyed.
I mean you know some people like playing golf or going fishing.
I really liked training and trying to throw further.
So it wasn't work.
It wasn't work.
Now I know that your faith means a lot to you.
Did you ever say any prayers?
Yeah, I did, but it was kind of interesting.
I always felt guilty about praying about winning.
I never could do that.
I felt like that's kind of selfish.
But I always had this little prayer to do my best, and everybody do their best, and I thought I'd win.
So if everybody did their best, I thought I'd win.
That was kind of a back doorway.
Where did you say that?
In your room?
No, no, to myself when I was getting ready to go.
I always said, you know, I wanted to do my best.
And you never did kneel down like some of the football players?
No, I didn't do that.
I did one time in a public way because I was kind of a private person.
And it was more of a relief thing in 1968 when the last thrower had finished and I had won.
And I said, it's over.
And I didn't realize until then the pressure that my whole career would have been a failure if I didn't win the gold medal.
I didn't throw well that day, wasn't happy with my performance.
And the feeling that I had when I got on the stand that day was relief that it's over and I can't take that away.
And now my career is complete, so.
There's a stigma for a world record holder.
in track and fields never to win a gold medal.
There's a stigma that goes with that.
And, you know, you win a gold medal but never be a world record holder.
But they can't take the medal away from you.
They take a record away from you pretty quick sometimes.
All right.
Let's do that whole Olympic year.
It's Mexico City and it's in the summer?
It's in September.
Oh, September.
All right.
Start back that spring and just describe that whole year.
Well I started out, I took it real easy indoors because it would be a long year and I'm trying to pace myself and I'm heavily favored, I'm probably as heavily favored to win the gold medal as any American athlete because by then I'd thrown 71, five and a half,
No one else had thrown 70.
I'd won everything.
I'd gone almost undefeated since the last Olympics.
And so I told myself I don't want to peak too soon.
I came out the first big outdoor meet.
I waited late because I wasn't competing, I was competing unattached so I waited until in April, late in April to go for my first outdoor meet and it was at Mount San Antonio in California and I went out there and I tried not to be in perfect throwing shape but I've been lifting hard and I was in good shape and I threw 69-10.
And mentally I said, you better slow down, you're going to peak too soon, which was a big mistake because then it took me a while to get back.
Matter of fact, that turned out to be in 1968 my best meat throw.
And so I kind of went through a period in there where I was getting a little anxious about it and I was inconsistent and I never quite got back in the rhythm when I did that.
I went to the trials.
in Lake Tahoe.
They built special tracks up at Lake Tahoe to be at the same altitude as Mexico City.
I think it was about 6,500, 7,000 feet.
And so we had to go out there and train at altitude to get used.
Everybody was scared to death about altitude.
It's going to kill the distance runners and it's going to mess up everybody else's performance.
Turned out not to do that, but everybody was, you know, you're reading stories about how distance runners are going to drop dead.
Well, so we went out there and trained early.
So you're in an environment that's close and in some ways made the pressure build.
In the trials,
I'm physically ready, but I'm just inconsistent for me.
And I threw 67.
I threw terrible.
The shot was coming out the side of my hand.
It wasn't coming out right, and it was going over 67 feet every time.
But I finished third behind Dave Maggard and George Woods, and Steinhauer wasn't far behind for fourth.
If I'd have finished fourth, I'd have stayed home.
I realized, it was almost a shock to me, I realized that, you know, what could happen.
So after that,
I went into really hard training and I was throwing 68 feet in practice which was way over what I'd normally do.
Now you were living where?
Stayed out there.
I didn't leave.
I stayed at altitude until we went straight to Mexico City.
I got down to Mexico City and it was kind of a circus atmosphere.
You worked out in this practice stadium and they had all kinds of people watching you.
There was no place to get off by yourself like it was in Tokyo in practice.
So you'd go out there and it'd just be a crowd gathering and your competitors would show up and it'd be a competition.
And I was throwing around at 70 feet in practice and I was really ready physically.
Well then they came, they really, Mexico was the first,
Olympics where they did a drug test.
And the only reason that was a concern was caffeine's on the list.
So they had us afraid if you drink two cups of coffee, you might fail the test.
If you drink one, you might not.
So obviously for about three days, you didn't drink any.
And, you know, that was an adjustment.
Cokes, you went off Cokes.
You're afraid to take aspirin.
We kind of got in a little habit of taking pills, sleeping pills to help you sleep.
They used to give them to us at A&M, you know, not for a basketball game or track meets.
You could get them from the trainer.
It wasn't illegal or anything.
But they said they may have something in it.
You better not.
Well, so you became paranoid.
Well, the living conditions in Mexico were three guys to a room.
in a room that was just, you could touch all the beds.
And I had Maggard in there, who was my friend, but competitor, and he beat me in the trials.
And I had Ed Burke, a hammer thrower, and his events were several days after ours, so he wasn't as uptight as we were.
And frankly, I got in, I don't know, you know, all that, but the night before the qualifying, I didn't sleep hardly at all.
But I went out and I threw like 67-10 with my sweats on, just took an easy throw and that's qualified you to get in the regular competition.
So I'm way ahead of everybody and that throw would easily win or have a, you know, good shot.
It would be hard for somebody to throw.
So I know I can throw farther than that.
Well, we go back and we have to spend another night.
Now in Tokyo, you qualify in the morning to compete in the afternoon.
Well, they did it two days there.
have to approach it differently on how far you taper down.
You want to rest but you don't want to rest too much.
So you take a day off for the qualifying because I've seen people favored to win the Olympics never get out of the qualifying round.
Just take it for granted they're going to do it.
So you have to be prepared a little bit.
Well then you've got another day that you really haven't done much.
And I didn't sleep well again, once again, because they're going to take all this big drug test.
So I was not in the best mental frame that I should be.
Then I was feeding the pressure of not to win but not to lose.
My whole approach was don't lose this thing.
And was your wife, your parents?
They came down.
They got down.
I didn't see them much.
I stayed in the village, and they stayed downtown.
Did you talk to them during those days of high pressure?
A day or two before I got to see them, they came in and visited.
And that was a help because I got away from it a little bit.
Then I went out in the day of the competition and I threw like 67, four and a half or five in there on my first throw.
And I said, well, at least that's a safe mark.
It takes the pressure off that way, but that's not going to win it for me.
Well, Woods, my biggest competitor is Woods and Maggard.
Maggard's sick.
He can barely throw.
Woods 366 1â„2 inch and the German, I think it's the German or the Russian, I can't even remember now.
It's East German through 6511 and then we go in the second round.
and I'm throwing ahead of them, and I throw 67, low 67s.
I don't improve, and they throw terrible, 63 or 4.
We go the next round, I throw right at 67.
They throw even worse, and the competition's over.
I don't improve.
They don't improve.
I was disappointed in the distance, but it was just a relief when I got on the victory stand finally.
It was just a feeling I had was not of excitement to jump up and down and say, it's over.
I mean, no one, you know, my career is complete.
And looking back, I really would have liked to have thrown 70 feet in the Olympics, even though that throw was still an Olympic record and an Olympic record, but it's not as good as I should have thrown and not normally what you'd think would have to take to win in the Olympics, even though the Olympics are tough sometimes because there's a lot of pressure.
I remember walking out of the stadium and Jay Sylvester, who was a good discus thrower and was throwing against Al Order and some other good discus throwers, said, you ought to be ashamed of throwing that in the Olympics.
And I remember saying, Sylvester, you better not say anything now until it's all over because all it counts is getting that gold.
He'd never gotten a gold medal.
He'd been favored in two different Olympics and he's favored to win this one.
And he got beat by order again in the Olympics.
Order won his fourth gold medal there.
And that's just the way the Olympics are.
You know, and you have to be, you know, a Jim Ryan never won a gold medal and was the greatest miler up to that time there had ever been.
So it was a feeling of relief.
Then we go to take the drug test because we hadn't had caffeine, we hadn't had sleep, hadn't had aspirin, hadn't had anything.
They didn't know about any drug tests.
So, well, what are we supposed to do?
You know, as soon as the ceremony's over, you're supposed to have a drug test.
And so we wait around, wait around.
They don't speak English very well, and we sure don't speak Mexican.
So after about an hour, we all leave and go to the village.
Two days later, we get a phone call or a message in our box, come take your test after we've been drinking coffee, you know, taking pills to sleep and muscle relaxers, whatever.
And so as far as I know, I never went over there and I don't think any others did.
But, you know, as far as enjoying it, what happened then shortly after that,
was the black power demonstrations at the Olympics by the American athletes and the media.
I don't think I had one question about what it felt like to win the gold medal or, you know, are you satisfied with it or what was it like is what did you think about the demonstrations?
It was a no-win deal for us.
We hid out until finally I couldn't
It's just unbearable with the media.
And because I like some of those guys.
And I lived in Texas in the 60s.
And if you got up and said, well, they had a right to do that at the Olympics.
They've been mistreated.
Well, I got to go home.
Or I didn't want to come across like a racist or something, you know, because they were my friends.
And so I took the brave way out and I went to the officials and said, I'm going home.
And they said, you can't.
You got to go home with the charter which leaves after the games and you're expected to go to certain things."
I said, okay.
So I went back, packed my bags, went out to the airport.
Scraped up $88 and got on an airplane and flew to Houston, Texas, and they're still looking for me down there.
And I came home.
Now, back in the Olympic Village where you athletes were living, what was happening in the black-white?
There wasn't any tension between the black and white athletes.
They were getting a lot of pressure from...
people like hired Cosell, what are you guys going to do, Edwards, Harry Edwards, the sociology professor of San Jose, about you need to make a statement.
Some of them did it reluctantly.
Some of them felt it was a thing to do.
It was a sad time because they took their medals away from them and sent them home.
And when you stood on that platform, as they put that gold medal around your neck and they played the national anthem, how did you feel about that?
It was a good feeling because it's something, you know, that was a milestone.
But it was a feeling of relief for me.
Not like it was when I got the silver medal in 64 with excitement and the thrill of that and then watching them do the gold medal and playing the national anthem for the winter.
I wanted that and I thought about it every day after that.
But when I finally got there, it was more of a feeling of relief.
And I probably should have handled that different.
I probably should have approached it
not so much at the end of the world and enjoyed the experience a little more.
In hindsight, was that 64 silver medal one of the greatest incentives you ever had?
Incentives?
To try harder?
I think so, but that was one of the greatest enjoyments I had.
You know, I threw my best in a competition where I wasn't expected to do that well and against the best in the world.
And, you know, I think generally in my career I was more satisfied with throwing my best than I was where I ended up when I was younger.
If I threw an inch farther than I'd ever thrown, no matter what place I got, I was happier.
Where did you put that gold medal that night back in the village?
Well, some of the athletes lost them.
they finally gave us a safe or something to put in.
Some of them put them under their mattress and stuff like that, but some of the athletes had them stolen and you can't be replaced.
So, if I remember right, they had a safe for us to go back.
All right.
Then when you got on the plane, where was it?
I carried it.
I carried it on the plane in my bag.
You didn't check it?
No.
And then when you got home, who did you show it to first?
I don't remember that.
You know, I flew to Houston.
and drove up to A&M and was honored at the halftime of the Arkansas football game.
And it was President Rudder was out there and President of the student body who later became a good friend of mine, Bill Carter, Coach Thomas out there.
And I didn't realize it at the time, but when I got home after that they presented me a plaque and when I got home
And President Rudder sent me a note and a little photo album of the occasion with the Aggie band out there, they'd spell my name out.
And that's one of my most cherished photographs I have today.
They spelled it wrong?
No, they put my name, they spelled my name out on the field in the Aggie band.
And that didn't happen very many times in history.
And I didn't know it until I got the photograph because I was out there on the field and you couldn't see what they had spelled out.
Now during those years that you were competing at the level of the world's best, you didn't turn much to any coach for their advice, but what role did Coach Thomas play in your career?
You know Coach Thomas, his background was sprinters and sprinting and he was very upfront with me.
I don't have a great deal of depth, experience with shot putters.
We've had good shot putters here.
Amo Mameliga was here.
He was not a great shot put technician coach because he'd never done that, but he could get you ready to throw it as well as anybody
in my opinion, for me, as well as anyone could have.
But I think from my high school coach giving me the foundation, Dwayne Lines, I think I got most of what I got working on my own.
Now there's one coach that helped me in 64, 68, and
I would consult with from time to time, and if I had an opportunity to spend more time with him, I think I might have thrown further, and that was Peyton Jordan, who was a coach at Stanford, Olympic coach.
and I worked well together and, you know, the problem you'd have with coaches is there was little different philosophies and you couldn't jump from one to the other.
You had to get it, find something, believe in it and ours kind of meshed together and he took what I was doing and he had the ability to look at me throwing and see the parts and I could look at film and wasn't very good.
I'm not a very good shot put coach.
Watching it, I have to look at their arm or see what they're doing or their leg and miss the other.
He could sit back and look at the whole throw.
And I'll tell you, though, there was another coach that helped me while I was at A&M, and he spent very little time with me because by then he was in his 70s, and that was Coach Andy, Coach Frank Anderson.
He came out and worked with me.
He helped me probably more in the discus than anyone.
he came out and told me that I wasn't keeping my arm back.
And I said, yeah, but I hear you saying that, but how do I do it?
And he said, well, just lock it back there.
Make your tricep against your lap back there and just stick it back there and don't let it come up.
And I threw 15 feet farther than I'd ever thrown while he was out there with me.
And through the rest of my career, I tried to remember that.
And he would come out from time to time and critique me a little bit and did help me some.
Describe Colonel Indy's personality and his style of doing things.
Well, he was kind of a feisty little guy, but...
But he was, at least for me, a positive coach.
He'd get in there and, you know, that's good, but you can do it a little better.
And Peyton Jordan is the same way.
No, that isn't the way to do it.
That's close, but here if you do this, it's going to even be better.
So he made you feel like you were heading in the right direction.
I think more coaches need to do that today, I think.
a lot of football and basketball coaches could benefit from being more positive.
I would like to say, I didn't finish about Coach Thomas.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Even though he didn't really get out there.
One time he came by and I'm throwing, and being a little honoree, I turn around and say, Coach, what did it look like?
He said, looks good, it's just not quite far enough.
And I said, okay, I'll try to throw it further.
And it's not a bad coaching philosophy, just...
let me work it out to get it farther and uh but on the other hand he gave me an environment that i was very comfortable in he protected me from outside things he never used me in any way i remember he felt really bad one time he came to me and said that
that they really wanted me to come to the Drake relays, but I wanted to go to Mt.
SAC.
That's where all the big guys were at.
And he said, well, they're going to give us like $1,500 to bring other guys.
He said, but only you and I know that.
See, and I could make money legally going to Mt.
SAC, because in those days they could send you the money for a first-class plane ticket in three days per diem.
I'd fly out late one day and come back and save the $25 a day per diem and make $50 off the ticket.
And that was a lot of spending money back then, and it was all legal.
And they changed the rules eventually.
They couldn't do that.
They'd give you tourists.
and they had to buy the ticket and all this kind of thing to keep people from doing that.
But I used to make my spending money doing that legally.
And if I could go to two meets in a weekend,
rack up.
But I thought about that and he didn't put any pressure on me and I eventually felt like I was part of the team.
I needed to go to Drake and we all flew on a plane up there together and I got to be with some of my teammates on a deal like that and it worked out for the best.
But he never put any pressure on me to go do anything that I didn't want to do.
He'd sit down with me and consult with me and tell me what he thought.
And that would not have been the case at a lot of places.
So that for you, his coaching technique... For me, his coaching technique enabled me to accomplish what I wanted to at A&M.
I think that might not have been the case at a lot of places.
And I'm thankful to him for that.
All right, now my favorite...
view of you throwing the shot occurred on April 22, 1967.
Describe that for you.
Well, that was my last official competition in Cowell Field, Randy Mattson Day.
And they gave me a plaque and that's when I threw the world record, 71-5.
Mr. S.M.
Meeks was equipment guy in charge of facilities.
And he came out and he was the only one that knew for sure that was a world record because I'd thrown 70 foot seven, but he put the line where it was short or long.
He put the line longer than the old record.
He knew if it hit the line that it was a record.
He said that way I'd know first.
And actually it went over the line and he said that he knew it was a world record first.
But there was about 10,000 people they tell me in the stadium that day.
and all of them in the end zone in my last official competition in Kyle Field.
And General Rudder was there and made a presentation to me afterwards.
Was that your first, did you set the record on the first throw?
First throw.
That's my thought.
All right, and you also threw the disc that day.
I threw the discus.
And didn't you come close to the work?
That was the day that I,
I came close that day.
That was not the day I threw the 213, but I threw over 200 feet.
That double that day would have stood up for a long time as the all-time best single shot and discus double until, oh, late, maybe in the 80s, Mack Wilkins or somebody I think had a better double on one day, but it was the best double in history for a long time.
All right.
This is an editor's note.
On Monday preceding that Saturday, April 22nd meet, I encountered Randy Mattson in the MSC hallway and I told him that I was the muster speaker in Waco and that they were going to pay for me and my family to have a wild Waco weekend, Friday and Saturday night, but I was going to cancel the Saturday night and come back
And so I could see him throw the shot for the last time wearing an Aggie uniform as an Aggie undergraduate at Kyle Field.
Then I asked him, will you make it worth my while?
He stopped and very seriously said, I'll do my best.
Then the next Monday, I saw him again at about the same time, and I asked him, Randy, how in the world were you able to do that?
And as I recall, he said, I was trying to figure out how I could show my...